Hi, everybody.
Welcome to the session on
the Font Manager in Mac OS X.
It has been a great year for us.
We've been doing a lot of
improvements on the supported fonts,
the different types.
If you went to, actually yesterday,
to the keynote,
you heard that now the font panel is
available for Carbon applications.
The group that has been working on that
is actually the Font Manager group,
and we'll have them today,
so this should be a pretty
interesting session.
Quickly, I'll go through the agenda.
We'll have a quick overview of what the
Font Manager is on Mac OS X and what have
been the changes compared with Mac OS 9.
We'll go through what I think is probably
the most important for you developers.
We'll go through a list of features
and enhancements that the team has been
working on for Mac OS codename Jaguar.
We'll have some demonstration
about these new features.
And, of course,
we'll go into the details of
programming APIs on how you're going
to be able to access the font panel,
for instance, and all these new features
and the new font that we're
supporting now on Mac OS X.
To talk about this overview
and build this presentation,
I'd like to introduce Mike Conley,
who is a senior software
engineer in the Type group.
And Mike will be actually guiding
you through all these features that
you're going to be discovering.
Thank you.
So I'm going to guide you through
the exciting and never-ending
fun world of the Font Manager.
As Xavier pointed out,
I'm going to do a quick overview.
I'm going to try to make it as
quick and painless as possible.
For those of you who have
already seen all this material,
you can probably just close
your eyes and get some rest,
and the rest of you can pay attention.
We'll wake the other folks up when
we're all done with the overview.
This is the diagram that describes
the interaction between applications
and Mac OS X font services.
You'll notice that various
applications communicate with the
Application Services Framework.
The Application Services Framework
contains,
among other things,
the QuickDraw subframework,
which exports the APIs for Atsui,
and QuickDraw text services,
which are used primarily by
Carbon applications and .
I just lost my mic.
HTML rendering.
It also exports the Quartz API.
I keep losing my mic.
But that's all right.
I'll just talk.
Quartz API,
which is part of Core Graphics,
and it's used by Cocoa applications.
All these subframeworks communicate
with the ATS client framework,
which handles all the ATS APIs and
SPIs used by the system.
And the ATS client framework
talks directly to the ATS server,
which is a separate process that's
responsible for maintaining the
font database for the entire system.
And it also handles such things
as activating and deactivating
your fonts and supplying glyph
outline data and table information,
name table information,
that sort of thing.
Font formats supported in OS X are
all the ones you're used to by now:
Macintosh TrueType, PostScript,
Windows TrueType,
OpenType fonts of various types.
For Jaguar,
and those of you who are sleeping
can keep on sleeping because we'll go
back over these in more detail later,
we plan to add
PostScript Multiple Master Support,
some enhancements to
our TrueType support,
and protected CID font support.
I'm sure by now you're all pretty
used to the user font locations.
These are the various font folders
which the system knows about.
We refer to these as domains,
user local network system,
and classic font domains.
These are the standard locations
where ATS Server will automatically
activate and deactivate
fonts for you as necessary.
If you want to have fonts installed
on your system that only the currently
logged in user has access to,
you should put them in the User Domain,
the User Fonts folder.
If you have fonts you want
to have all the users on a
given system have access to,
they should go into the Local Domain,
the Local Fonts folder.
The System Fonts folder,
the system domain is designed
specifically for fonts that
are used by the system,
and you really shouldn't be
putting anything in there.
We would really prefer it if you didn't.
Classic Font Domain is for cases
where you have a large number of
users who have access to a common file
server and a large number of fonts you
want to share with all those users.
You can install them on a network server,
which comes up on a mount
point on everybody's system.
They all will have access
to the same set of fonts,
and it makes administration and control
of those files a whole lot simpler.
Of course,
then there's the Classic Fonts folder,
which is in the currently active system
folder for Classic on your system,
and it will change depending on which
Classic system you decide to select.
Note that Classic apps, of course,
only have access to those fonts.
They don't get access to the other ones.
When you're activating fonts,
you can do it programmatically
from anywhere in the system.
You don't have to depend on
the standard font domains.
If your application
needs to activate a font,
you can put the fonts in any
folder that you know about.
You can put it in your
application bundle.
You can stick it in your application
resource fork and activate it
programmatically from there,
if you like.
Note that unlike OS 9, of course,
application resource fork fonts
don't get activated automatically
when you open up the file.
You have to actually to
make a call to do that.
For Jaguar, we plan to add a new feature
called Auto Activation,
and I'll be talking about
that a little bit later.
After we've woken everybody up.
Installing fonts.
Installing fonts,
everybody's used to how to do that.
You drag and drop them into
the standard font directories.
On application launch or at user login,
ATS Server will automatically scan those
directories and activate the fonts or
deactivate ones that have been removed.
We do resolution of duplicate
fonts across domains.
If you have two of the same font,
we will handle the resolution
between those two and select one
preferentially over the other.
Font ID conflicts will be
handled by synthesizing font IDs,
which is why, as we'll mention later on,
it's a bad idea to use font IDs to
track fonts in your documents because
they're not unique across boots.
For Jaguar,
we plan to add a couple of new features:
handling nested font subdirectories,
and font notification API,
which will be discussed in
more detail in a minute.
Most of you are familiar with the
API for the standard Carbon font menu.
It gives you an easy and uniform
way of putting up a font menu
for all your Carbon applications.
For Jaguar,
we plan to add an API to support the font
panel that you've seen in Cocoa apps,
which will allow you to have a
uniform font selection across both
Carbon and Cocoa applications,
and we'll talk about that in a bit.
Okay, time to wake up.
So, all you guys were sleeping.
These are the new features that
we're planning on adding for Jaguar,
and we'll go through them one by one and
discuss them in a little more detail.
So the overview wasn't too bad, was it?
Nice and painless.
Postscript Multiple Master Fonts.
We plan to support Postscript
Type 1 Multiple Master Fonts.
They will show up as typefaces,
separate typefaces of a given
type family in applications,
in font menus and in the font panel.
You'll be able to select the instances,
the intrinsic instances
as a typeface or a style.
If you have a document that
has a Multiple Master Font in
it or uses one that is not,
even if it is not an intrinsic
instance of that Multiple Master Font,
it will be rendered correctly.
We've heard from our users that some
of them miss some of the features
that they used to get with their
Quick Draw based apps from ATM,
such as the metrics and
kerning from the font.
They would like to have those on 10,
and they're going to
get them under Jaguar.
We'll be synthesizing data for the font,
kerning and metrics information,
identical to what used
to be available in ATM.
You will have to make virtually no
change to your code in order to get this.
The only change is the API to
actually load the font data,
which is very minor,
and we'll be talking about that
when we talk about the APIs.
Now you won't have to worry
or wish that you had ATM on
10 because you won't need it.
It will all be there for you.
Copy-protected CID fonts are
extremely important to our
Asian business and design markets,
and we are going to be
supporting them in JAGUAR,
or we plan to.
If you happen to have a
copy-protected CID font installed
in your classic fonts folder,
we will activate it,
and we will respect all the
copy protection requirements.
The protocols that are
intrinsic to that font,
things like resolution restriction,
selective PDF embedding,
selective outline extraction,
all that sort of thing, will all work.
We've tested these fairly
extensively with our Japanese desktop
publishing applications,
and they work great.
You'll have that, with any luck.
uh... nested font subdirectories so
no longer do you have to tear apart
your carefully constructed font folder
hierarchies in order to install a font
on OS X you'll be able to simply drag
the folder to a standard font folder and
ATS Server will scan it automatically
as part of the standard process you
can now drop the entire Adobe FontFolio
CD into a font folder and it will
be activated automatically for you.
Font Notification We plan to be
able to give clients the ability
to register for notification when
we activate and deactivate fonts.
This will allow you to
update your HI as necessary.
You'll be able to do things
like update your font menu,
update the font panel,
which of course you'll be supporting,
and any other things you need to
do as part of your user interface.
You will require a
CF RunLoop-based application,
but of course since Carbon and Cocoa apps
are by default CF RunLoop-based,
you don't have this problem unless you're
writing a tool or some kind of other
application that doesn't have a UI,
like a server of some sort.
Normally applications would
receive these notifications
when they're in the foreground.
If you suspend the app
into the background,
the notification will be delivered
once the app comes into the foreground.
If you've got a tool or a server that
doesn't have a GUI associated with it,
you can ask to get the notification
immediately so you won't have to wait,
obviously.
Clients will be able to register
for auto-activation notification.
For instance,
if you've got a document and
it's got a font in it that's
not installed on the system,
ATS will, if clients have registered
for auto-activation,
start scanning its list of
registered clients and ask
them to activate the font.
So if you have a third-party
font management software,
you now have a hook that will
tell you when it's time to go
and activate a particular font.
You won't have to activate
them ahead of time.
You can do it on request from ATS.
The registered client will then
go ahead and activate the font,
pass the data back to ATS,
and ATS then supplies it
to the client as requested.
The client is none the wiser
and thinks it all came from
the system just normally.
So that's...
Font Panel for Carbon.
As you heard from Xavier and from
other people during the conference,
we will be supporting the
Font Panel for Carbon.
We will have an API that will
allow Carbon applications
to access the Font Panel,
to be able to send font selection
information to the Font Panel,
and receive font selection
information from the Font Panel.
The font data reception
is Carbon event-based,
but even if you have
a Wait Next Event app,
which of course none of you
do because you've all adopted
the Carbon event model,
but if you did,
you would be able to do this
because Wait Next Event,
of course,
handles Carbon events just fine.
You just have to write a
little Carbon event handler,
and it's really not too difficult.
So this diagram here is a schematic
of the interaction between the
various components that I've
talked about with the ATS software.
Finder will notify ATS Server when
changes are made to the
standard font domains,
and ATS Server can then tell
registered clients that fonts have
been activated or deactivated.
Likewise,
clients can register for auto-activation
as part of the auto-activation queue,
and when fonts are requested
that can't be supplied by
the standard installed fonts,
ATS will query registered
third-party font manager clients and
obtain font activation from them.
The font panel is implemented actually
as part of the common panels framework,
so you would link against that,
but it will communicate with ATS in
order to obtain font information,
and it will pass font selection
information by Carbon event
back to the client applications.
While we were at it,
we took some steps to improve
stability of the system as a whole.
One of the major problems that we
run into occasionally is that while
interpreting data from font files
that may have gotten corrupted,
you may walk off into the weeds
and generate address exceptions.
We've improved the exception handling
for this on ATS Server and in the
scalers so that we're able to catch
these exceptions more reliably.
We also have a facility internally
to disable suspect font files if
we think they might be corrupt.
We can notify the user when
that's happened so he can then
remove them if he wants to.
We've also made the API thread safe.
We've added some better error
checking throughout the system.
Even of course, though there weren't many
bugs there to start with,
we have gone and fixed bugs.
All this has led to improved
stability of the system.
Also, we've enhanced performance.
We've improved font streaming for
such activities as PDF embedding,
downloading fonts to printers.
Log in and log out has been sped up
by caching more information to disk.
It still takes a while to activate those
10,000 fonts that you just installed,
but after the first time,
it's a lot faster.
TrueType Font Scaler has been sped up.
We do a little more caching
throughout the system so that
we return data to you faster.
We also allocate memory more efficiently,
so we're not constantly deallocating
and allocating memory all the time.
All of this makes ATS faster,
which makes for the faster applications.
That, of course, makes for happier users,
and that is a good thing.
What I'd like to do now is
introduce our demonstration.
We're going to demo some of the
features that I just talked about,
notably the font panel,
the notification API,
and the auto-activation system.
To do those demos for you
will be Nathan Taylor,
one of our software engineers.
Thanks.
Thank you for the introduction, Mike.
I'm going to be showing you a demo of
some of our planned features for Jaguar.
I've implemented these into some
of the apps you may recognize,
actually one in particular.
So let me switch over and
show you what we've got.
First off,
I wanted to show you the Nested Font.
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to bring up TextEdit with
a document that uses these fonts.
As you can see,
we now have the fonts that
were in that folder activated,
and they are present in the
font panel so you can use them.
As you can see,
I have a Cocoa application here,
TextEdit.
It comes with a font panel by default.
We'd like you to add font panels
to your Carbon applications,
and it's a feature we
have planned for Jaguar.
So let me bring up a version
of Simple Text with a font
panel and give you something to
Okay, so I've reduced, as you can see,
the menu bar of simple
text is greatly reduced.
There is only now a font menu, no style,
and no size menus.
If I bring down the font panel,
everything that you expect
to be there is here.
I can change a selection of text, and
To a particular font, face, and size,
and everything is supported.
Contrast this with an older
version of simple text.
Where we have a long font menu,
slightly difficult to navigate,
especially with multiple master
fonts involved and multiple UIs,
the UI is now more consistent with the
font panel between Cocoa applications
and Carbon applications.
What happens now if I remove those
fonts I just put in there and
want to view that document again?
I think you're all familiar with this.
Your users may have complained about it.
I
If we try to open a document
without the fonts present,
it's going to take a little
while as it looks for the fonts,
ask the ATS server where they are,
and you get nothing.
I mean,
everything here is rendered in Helvetica.
Things don't look as they should.
It's pretty ugly.
With the new auto-activation feature,
and let me actually set something
up for another bit of this demo.
A simple font server.
This font server knows
about a folder of fonts,
the ones I want.
If I start it up,
it's going to scan the directory,
make a little database.
Now I can bring up simple text or text
edit and try to open that document again.
You see the red text scrolling.
The font server processes the requests
and we get the fonts we expect to see.
Everything's there.
But look what simple text
did in the background.
I've set the simple text up
to receive notifications.
It got a notification
for each activation.
As I have it set up,
unfortunately there's a few of them,
the font menu was updated on
receipt of the notification.
Now Adobe Garamond Pro is available
and I can select it and change text.
What's also nice is doing this,
the document refreshed,
and where I have family, style, and size,
those also got refreshed and pulled
up the fonts that they needed.
That concludes the brief demo
of planned Jaguar features.
We hope you'd like to implement the
Font Panel in your Carbon applications,
and we hope some of the font utilities
out there will take advantage of the
auto-activation feature we have planned.
I get the distinct pleasure of talking
to you about the programming interface.
I'll be talking to you for
about the next 40 minutes about
the programming interface,
and I've got to warn you,
there is going to be some code,
so bear with me, pay attention,
take notes, it'll help you down the road.
The first couple things I'm going
to talk about are the API sets.
There are two basic API sets on Mac OS X,
and I will go over those
with a little bit of detail.
Next, common programming tasks that
we've received questions about
and that you need to do to make
your apps work with fonts better.
Finally, performance issues and ways to
get around them and diagnose them.
Let's see if I have the API sets.
The first API set you may
have been familiar with when
migrating from Mac OS 9 to
Mac OS X is the Font Manager API.
This is available on Mac OS 9.
It's also in CarbonLib,
and it's available on Mac OS X.
This includes all the APIs that
are prefixed with the FM insignia,
I guess.
An example is this
FM Create Font Family Iterator.
For Mac OS X only,
we have the ATS set of APIs.
Again, these are all prefixed with ATS,
an example of which is
ATS Font Iterator Create.
If you are writing an application
that is designed for Mac OS X and
you want some new functionality,
you may want to consider
looking at the ATS APIs.
When working with fonts
and font families,
there are several types of references
you're going to need to work with.
Font references include the ATS Font Ref,
FM Font, and ATSU Font ID.
Family references include the
ATS Font Family Ref and FM Font Family,
which you are probably familiar
with if you use Quick Draw.
One thing to keep in note is that
these references cannot be different.
An exception to this is that
the FM font and ATSU font ID are
essentially the same thing.
It's important,
because they are different,
that you use provided conversion
APIs to convert from an FM font
to an ATS font ref if you'd like
to use it within an ATS API.
Here's a list of some of the
more common programming tasks,
and some of which we have
received the most questions about.
The first two most common tasks
that you will need to perform,
especially if you want to
activate a font for your UI,
is activation and enumeration.
You'll need to enumerate the
fonts to build font lists,
font menus of your own,
or just to get an idea of the
fonts that are on the system.
When saving a document
that your user has created,
you need to worry about
storing font references and
doing it in a persistent way.
Next,
when migrating from Quick Draw to the
new APIs or from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X,
conversion and compatibility
functions are important to consider.
Finally,
we have a list of some of the new
features we have planned for Jaguar.
This includes notification,
and I'll go into detail on
how to implement notification
in your application.
We have the font panel and font menu.
The menu is not entirely new,
but we'd like to reinforce
on how to use it.
And we have auto activation,
which font utilities can use to
provide fonts on queries if they are
not available in the current database.
The first task I'd like
to cover is activation.
If your application needs
a special font for its UI,
you're going to want
to activate that font.
Or if you have a font utility,
you're going to need to activate
fonts that the user requests.
To activate fonts,
there are three basic APIs:
ATS Font Activate from
File Specification,
ATS Font Activate from Memory and
FM Activate Fonts The File Specification
API and FM API both take a file
spec to activate a font and are
our preferred APIs for you to
use when you need to do this.
The ATS Font Activate from
Memory API is provided as a mechanism
to activate raw TrueType data.
We don't recommend that you use
this unless you absolutely need to.
The ATS Font Activate from
File Specification API handles a
lot of the stuff in the background
and will activate the complete
set of fonts that we support
and is easier to use in that way.
Finally, when you're done with a font
and you don't need it anymore,
you want to deactivate the fonts.
I'm not going to go into too much detail
here because it's really quite simple.
Here's a close-up of the activation
API if you haven't taken a look
at the header documentation
Some of the key areas of interest
in this API are the context
parameter and the option parameter.
When using the context parameter,
you have two options you can use,
or actually three.
There is local, global, and unspecified.
Unspecified is actually
equivalent to local.
This defines the accessibility of
the fonts that you are activating and
restricts the access to these fonts
to a specific set of applications.
Globally activated fonts will
be available to all applications
and local to your own client.
The Options field is necessary to
support Resource Fork or Data Fork.
You can specify that in this field.
This is important if you want to
activate a font that you may have
stored in the Resource Fork of your
application via the old method.
Specify the file spec
to your application,
Resource Fork, that will do it for you.
One of the quick ways,
now that we have the
The first step in hierarchical folder
activation is you can activate a font or
all the fonts stored in your application
bundle by just specifying the main bundle
as the file spec using the options field
to specify the process subdirectories
and if you want them local,
use a local context.
That will activate all the
fonts inside of your bundle.
Here's a quick example
of how to use these APIs.
Here I'm activating a font in a
local context with default options.
This is what I would need to
do if I just want this font
for use within my application.
When I'm done with it, I deactivate it.
When you want to build a font list,
you need to get an idea of
all the fonts on the system.
To do this, you want to enumerate them.
We have several APIs to enumerate the
different types of font structures.
We have font family iterators,
font iterators,
and family instance iterators.
An example of a font family
is Helvetica by itself.
This is the group of faces
that comprise Helvetica.
To iterate through these fonts,
you can use either the family iterators,
the ATS or FM family iterators.
If you would like to
iterate through the fonts,
such as Helvetica Bold or
Helvetica Oblique,
you can use the font iterators
provided in both ATS and Font Manager.
Finally,
for those of you that are familiar
with walking the font association
table in the font resource,
we have an
FM Create Font Family Instance Iterator.
This instance iterator allows
you to walk through the specific
instances that you would normally
find in the font association table,
such as Helvetica, Bold, 12Point.
All you need to do in this case
is use the API and you don't
actually need to get the font.
Okay, did I go too far?
Alright, sorry about that.
This is a close up of font enumeration.
We have the
Font Iterator Creator for ATS,
and the key parameters that I'd like to
point out to you here are the context,
the filter, and the options.
Similar to activation,
the context is used to specify
the accessibility of the
fonts you want to look at.
It's different in the sense that you
are using it in conjunction with an
option bit to restrict or unrestrict
the accessibility that you want.
The option bits have a
synergy with the context,
and you can restrict or unrestrict it.
As you briefly saw as I flew by,
there is a chart that I will
show you next that outlines
how these work together.
First,
I'd like to just mention the filter here.
It's an important aspect.
You can create a custom filter,
and if you need to pass in information,
you can pass it in through the RefCon.
The filter is designed to allow
you to filter out or reduce the
fonts that you get returned from
your iteration to within a set
of parameters that you define.
Here is the chart outlining the
interactions between contexts and scopes.
We've received a few questions
about how these work.
We've implemented some changes with 10.1
that made it make more sense and allow
you to access things more consistently.
Let me walk you through this.
If you want to use a local context and
a restricted scope in your iteration,
this will get you all the fonts
that are activated locally to
your application and none others.
If you specify a global
context and a restricted scope,
this will get you all the fonts that
were activated globally in the system,
including fonts in the font directories,
but not fonts that were activated locally
by your application or any others.
Similarly, using an unrestricted scope
with a local context gets you
the default sets of fonts.
These are the fonts that we
want your application to see.
It's the global activations as
well as your own local fonts.
You can also get to this by using
default parameters as opposed to
specifying local or unrestricted.
This is the equivalent.
Finally, there is the Global Context.
This is of interest to developers of font
utilities that want to know all the fonts
that are in the system and be able to go
through them and discern which they are.
Specifying Global Context and
Unrestricted Scope gets you this.
Here's a quick example of enumeration.
I actually skipped to this
a little too quickly before,
but as you see,
it's pretty easy to set up an iterator.
Here I'm creating one with a local
context and an unrestricted scope.
I'm going to pass this iterator that
I get back into ATS Font Iterator
next and continue iterating
until I get a status code back.
Here's where things get
a little interesting.
The status code tells you
something about your iteration.
Let me show you those.
First status code,
and the one you want to see most often,
is that the iteration has completed.
When you get this code,
it means everything went
through successfully,
you're done,
you don't need to worry about anything,
go home and have a nice day.
If you get the Iteration Scope
Modified error or status code,
it's there to tell you
that something has changed.
Someone behind your back
went in and activated a font,
deactivated a font to
cause a database change.
This iterator is there to tell you
that your iteration was not complete.
You should reset the iterator
using the Reset API and try again.
Well, here's something interesting.
This is one of those features
we have planned for Jaguar,
notification support.
In order to provide
notification support to you,
you first need to create a callback.
This callback is meant to
handle the notification and
do something when you get it.
The most common thing
is to update your UI,
such as updating the font menu.
To subscribe to notifications,
you need to call the API and
register the callback.
When something happens to the database,
a font has been activated or dropped
into one of the font folders,
your application,
if it's in the foreground,
will receive a notification.
There is also an API of interest
here to installer developers.
Installers often had a problem
of installing fonts into a font
folder manually or programmatically,
and other applications
not seeing these fonts.
Well now, installers can notify
ATS Server that they've done this.
And ATS Server can then rescan
the directories and then
provide notifications to all
the clients that are available.
Lastly, if you're tired of
receiving notifications,
your app is finished,
or you just don't want
to get them anymore,
unsubscribe and your application
will stop getting notifications.
Here's a brief example of a
simple notification callback.
Notice that the callback
has two parameters,
an info ref and a refcon.
The InfoRef currently is unused but
is available for future expansion.
We intend to be able to provide
notifications down the road for
other tasks happening behind your
back besides just activation.
But what we currently have planned for
Jaguar is notifications for activation.
Here's an example of what to do.
I'm updating my standard font menu
so that when the next time the user
looks at the fonts he has available,
he'll get what he needs.
The ATS Font Notification API is, well,
the subscribe API I have here is what
you will use to register your callback.
You pass in your callback.
Here I'm using default options.
I don't need to pass
any information through,
and I'm going to get a
notification ref back.
This option flag that I have
here could be substituted by an
immediate notification option
flag that Mike described earlier,
whereby a faceless font server can
receive notifications immediately,
instead of having to wait
until their application is
brought into the foreground,
which might not ever happen.
Finally, when you're done,
unsubscribing is a piece of cake.
They pass in the notification
ref you got back,
and you'll no longer be
told when things happen.
One of the complex problems that
developers need to solve is how
do I store fonts in my document so
that when a user opens the document,
they get the correct font displayed
and everything looks appropriate.
We have a few recommendations
for you and a few things we
recommend that you not do.
First, the good stuff.
We recommend storing the font
family name and style bits.
This is much like what
Apple Works currently does,
and it's been working for them,
and it's something we've
recommended that you do in the past.
AppKit applications store
the PostScript name.
This is also another fairly
unique way to determine fonts,
and it's another method
that we would recommend.
You also have options
of using a full name,
or a full name in combination
with a manufacturer name,
or some other combination of
names available within the font.
You might need to develop your
own heuristics because all
fonts don't have the same data,
and not all data is as
reliable as the next.
A couple of bad things to
do that Mike hit on earlier.
Don't store IDs.
It's simple.
They are not guaranteed across reboots.
We do font family synthesis behind
the scene so that a font family
ID may not be consistent once
another font has been activated
or the system has been restarted.
The same holds for font IDs.
When bringing your application
up to Mac OS X for Mac OS 9,
you're going to need to
worry about conversion.
For Quick Draw developers,
you're used to working with font
families and style bits and whatnot.
Well, with some of the APIs that you
will want to use on Mac OS X,
you'll need to get a font from this.
We have a couple APIs to do that.
You can get a font from a
font family instance with the
FM_Git_Font_Family instance from font,
actually the other one,
and given its family and the style,
you'll get a font back.
To go the other way,
from a font to a family instance,
you can use the API I just
mentioned earlier,
and it will give you the family
and the style from the font.
One thing to keep in note here
is that this conversion is
not necessarily one-to-one.
A font may represent a different
style within different families.
For example,
a Helvetica Bold/Oblique font
could be the oblique style
in a Helvetica Bold family,
as well as the Bold/Oblique style
within the Helvetica family.
This is often the case with
family synthesis for OTF fonts.
Another major task to worry
about is compatibility.
How do I take the things I've
been working with with Quickdraw,
with Mac OS 9, with CarbonLib,
and bring them over so that they
work seamlessly with Mac OS X?
For example, I'm used to getting the font
resource and pulling out of the
font resource kerning information.
Well, as Mike mentioned,
we now synthesize font
resources for OpenType fonts.
This is the API, or two APIs, HTS Font,
Git Font Family Resource,
and FM Git Font Family Resource.
These APIs will provide
to you the font resource,
if available, or synthesized,
which you can then use with your
normal methods that you have before
from Quickdraw to apply kerning
to pairs or to get the metrics.
Another API if you need to
know about font files to worry
about are the ATS FontKit file
specification and FM Git container
from Font Family Instance.
If you are used to actually delving
into the font data yourself and
there's information in there that
we don't provide an accessor to,
you're going to want to use these
APIs to get the font file spec
and look at the font yourself.
One thing to keep in note
that the different APIs have
slightly different behavior.
ATS font get file specification will
provide you the file spec to the
file containing the outline data.
What that means in the case of
PostScript fonts with auxiliary
LWFN files is that you will get
the file spec for the LWFN file,
not the file spec for the
suitcase containing the bitmaps.
FM container from Font Family Instance,
on the other hand,
is designed to return you the
container that holds the font resource.
Now, if a font doesn't have
a native font resource,
you will get back an error.
But the goal of this is to
provide you access to the
font with the font resource.
Finally, the last two APIs are of
interest to those of you coming
up from Quick Draw into some of
the new API sets on Mac OS X,
such as Atsui or Cocoa, etc.
If you have been storing in
your documents and you want to
provide backwards compatibility,
for example, to old documents that have
Quick Draw names or font family names
in them and use the ATS API set,
we have a mechanism to get the
Quick Draw name for storage
and also to find a font family
from the Quick Draw name.
This is the big feature that we
have planned for Jaguar and the
one that we're most excited about.
We would really like you to
implement the font panel inside
of your Carbon applications.
As I showed you in the demo,
it can simplify your menu bar,
it can simplify your user interface,
and it provides a consistent user
interface for font selection between
Cocoa frameworks and Carbon frameworks.
There are several things you need
to worry about doing when you
want to implement the font panel.
The first one is to toggle the font panel
state to show it when the user wants it
and hide it when they're done with it.
You may also have a need to
query the font panel state,
but this API is not used quite as often
as showing it or updating the display,
which is the next,
probably most important thing you need to
worry about to provide a consistent UI.
When a user changes their selection
in their document or moves the cursor
around into a different style run,
you want to update the display
of the font panel and let it
know which styles to provide.
There's an API to do that.
I will go into that in
a little bit of detail.
The other important thing about this
particular API is that it tells the
font panel which window target to send
the Carbon events for the selection to.
So that leads me into the next topic,
is how do you get the selection?
Well, we've defined a Carbon event suite
that you can implement a handler for
that will tell you when a font has
been selected from the font panel,
and you can pull out
the information from it.
Let me just quickly show you,
in the worst case,
the most work you would have to
do to implement the font panel.
To implement the planned font panel
with the WaitNext event application,
you would need to build
a Carbon event handler.
To handle the command classes for
the application and then be able
to handle the command parameter
to show and hide the font panel.
When you get this, you call the API FP,
show hide font panel.
There is no parameter list.
It's really simple.
Just call it and you'll
get the font panel.
When the font panel and the
user have made a selection,
your application and your window
will receive a Carbon event.
This event will be of type of class font,
and there are two types you may get.
One, that the font panel has closed,
or more importantly,
that you've gotten an
event for a font selection.
Once you get this font selection,
then you're going to need to want to
pull out of the event some parameters.
If you have an ATSUI-based application,
you'll be interested in pulling out
the ATSU font ID and ATSU font size.
If you're still working with
a Quickdraw-based application,
or you just want to get the font family,
you can pull out the FM font family,
font style, and size.
Finally, because the font panel provides
support for coloring fonts,
there is a parameter to pull
out the color information,
which you can then apply
to your text if you desire.
So first off, here's an example,
when I receive a Carbon event,
of how I would pull out the font family.
You can see it's really quite simple.
I determine the event kind,
I then get the parameter out
of the event once I determine
that it's actually a selection.
I ask for the font family, I get it back,
and then the last thing I need to do
is apply it to the user selection.
Say a user is mousing
around through the document,
selecting different style runs.
You want the font panel to represent
the current selected style run.
To do this,
you need to tell it that it has changed,
and then the font panel will
automatically update its UI.
So the first thing to do is to build,
in this case,
I'm using a QuickDraw info structure
that includes the instance,
the font family and style,
as well as the size,
and then I send that to the font panel
with the window target reference.
As I mentioned a couple slides ago,
this window target
reference is important.
This tells the font panel which
window that it should send
its next selection event to.
If you pass null through here,
your selection events are going
to go into the great beyond,
into the void, and you'll never get them.
If you don't pass the
correct window target here,
then you're going to get some interesting
behavior as other windows that the
user didn't mean to update get updated.
The old way of handling font selection
in Carbon applications was the font menu.
This is pretty convenient.
It's a simple list of fonts.
It works fairly well,
but with the number of fonts
we support in Mac OS X,
it can get extremely long
and extremely cumbersome.
But if you continue
and you want to use it,
we have some APIs that
we recommend that you
Create the menu, update the menu,
and determine a selection.
It's important to keep in mind
that although we are recommending
that you use the font panel
that we planned for Jaguar,
you may still find a good
use for this font menu.
The first thing you need to do in making
the font menu is create the standard font
menu for the appropriate menu handle.
Here I'm giving you an example of
how to create the hierarchical menu.
This will provide a menu containing
families and hierarchical menus of the
various instances available for them.
When my app receives
a notification event,
or a notification when
my callback is hit,
I want to update the font menu.
ATS is telling me that something
has changed in the database,
and I want the user to know this.
If you're not subscribing
for notifications,
we also recommend that you call update
standard font menu either when your
application is brought to the foreground
or when the user clicks on the font menu.
But here I'm showing you how
to update the standard font
menu for a hierarchical menu.
And then to get the selection,
when the user has selected a font,
you can pull out the family
and the style information with
Get Font Family from Menu Selection.
Here's the big feature that we
have received a lot of requests
for from utility developers
that we plan to get into Jaguar,
which I noticed during the demo,
got a few oohs and aahs as the red
text scrolled by and the document
appeared with the fonts that it needed.
Auto activation.
There's a hook in ATS to support auto
activation that you will receive queries
to your server and utility when a
client application requests a font that
does not exist in the the database.
The type of message ID you will get is
the KATS Query Activate Font Message.
This is
The message I did to let you know
that somebody wants a font and
they want you to activate them.
To register for queries,
you'll want to register a
callback with ATS Create font
query and run loop source.
And then the source you get
back from this should be
applied to the CF run loop.
Again, all Carbon applications with
a UI have a CF run loop,
so there's nothing extra
you really need to do.
But if you were doing a faceless server,
like the one I had,
you need to make sure that your
application does have a CF run loop.
Here's an outline of the
communications that occur when a
font query request comes through.
The application here has requested
a font by its postscript name,
family name, any sort of name that we
can allow a font query on.
The query goes through to
the ATS client library,
which knows about the port that
the font utility has subscribed.
This port was sent to the ATS server,
which passed it on to the
clients as they were launched.
So the communication in this case
goes directly from the client to the
font utility to query for a font.
The font utility then does its work,
parses its database,
translates the query into
a file specification,
and uses the ATS client
to activate the font,
which triggers a message
to the ATS server and tells
it to activate the font,
which then goes out to
all clients on the system.
And, as I showed you in the demo,
this will also trigger notifications.
Creating a callback for auto
activation support is a little bit
more difficult than a callback for
notification because there's more
work that you need to do inside of it,
but it's not that hard.
The callback takes in a message ID,
the data reference, and a RefCon.
The message ID that you care about
at this point in time would be the
KATS Font Request Query Message ID,
at which point when you receive it,
you take the data that is received,
you parse the data, which I will show you
an example of later,
and then you translate that into
the font file that you need to open.
So registering the callback is as
simple as calling one API with it.
As I mentioned,
it's the ATS Create Font Query
and Run Loop Source API.
You pass in your callback.
The first two parameters there
are to indicate a--one of them
is there to indicate a precedence
for your callback query.
Zero is default,
but you can put your query handler
at a higher precedence order so
that it will get handled first.
Now we can see precedence wars occurring,
and hopefully they won't,
but we recommend that for the most
part you use zero as it will work fine.
Finally, once you get the source back
from registering your callback,
you need to add this source
to your current run loop
through CFRunLoop Add Source.
When your callback is
called to handle the query,
first thing you're going to do is
you're going to get back a CFDictionary.
That's the data.
Then you can query the dictionary
to verify that it contains a key,
and you'll want to walk through
all the keys that you care about.
In this case, I'm looking for a
Quick Draw Family Name key.
Then get the value for
the appropriate key.
And then, as I said before,
translate that into a file
specification and activate it.
One thing to keep in mind,
when implementing query
handling and auto-activation,
it's important that you need to
activate in the global context,
because if you activate
it default or locally,
the app that needed it
isn't going to see it.
The last thing that I really wanted to
talk about was some of the performance
issues that you may encounter
when bringing your applications
to Mac OS X or writing new ones.
And here are some solutions we
have to help you solve these.
One is the User Notification API.
This prevents you from having to query
the generation seed of the database
regularly to pick up generation
changes and update your user interface.
Now granted, the generation seed and
acquiring that is not expensive,
but it saves you from having to pull,
which is a good thing.
Use the performance tools
available on Mac OS X,
such as Top, to gauge server messaging.
The APIs you use could send
a message to the ATS server.
There is a cost associated
with sending these messages.
And you want to watch
for ATS server activity,
especially very heavy activity when
your application might be unresponsive,
and evaluate your usage of the APIs.
We do our best to provide caching,
but sometimes...
APIs are used how we don't expect
them to and can cause undue messaging
and performance degradation.
Another way to avoid performance
problems is to avoid using the primitives
while iterating through all the fonts.
This is such as getting the font
tables for any specific table,
like the name table,
to handle it yourself and walk through
it and determine the names of the font.
Use an API like ATS font get postscript
name instead of the primitive if all
you really want is the postscript name.
This avoids bringing and mapping all the
font files in and thrashing our caches.
That leads me into the last topic.
Try to use the high-level
APIs whenever possible.
We've analyzed their usage,
we provide caching,
and they are optimized for optimal usage.
And if you find a problem with it,
please notify us or
Developer Relations and we
will address them as necessary.
So, in summary,
I'd like to reiterate some
of the topics I talked about.
I showed you how using
context and scopes,
you can use the iteration
APIs to iterate only the fonts
that you really care about.
This is important.
You don't have to -- you can
reduce the fonts you get back,
improve your application's response,
and restrict your search very easily.
Next, we can't stress hard enough
how much we would like you to
implement the font panel in your
Carbon application once it's available.
This,
as I've mentioned a couple times before,
will provide a consistent
UI between the two stacks,
between AppKit and Carbon.
It'll make the feature parity
seem like it's present.
We all know that Carbon does a lot
for us and we can do everything
that Cocoa does with Carbon.
But now we've got the font panel
and we can be very sure of that.
Continue developing to the programming
interface of the Font Manager,
especially if you are concerned
with compatibility between
CarbonLib on Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
But if you are looking to take the jump
and make Mac OS X-only applications,
make sure to review the ATS framework,
as here is where this
is our future direction.
This is what we would like
you to be using down the road,
and a lot of our work will be focused
on improving this API set for you.
I'd like to call Xavier up
to cover the roadmap and...
Thanks, Nathan.
Thank you.
This afternoon, we'll have actually
drawing text with AdSui,
which is like the higher-- the
low-level interface is the way
to put it to draw Unicode text on
Mac OS X for Carbon applications.
On Thursday,
I invite you to go and see the MLT,
which is the Multilingual
Text Engine session,
where we'll be discussing actually
some great features that the
team has been adding for Jaguar.
I think you'll be pretty happy
with what we've been doing.
Should you have any feedback,
we have a feedback forum,
which unfortunately is not there,
and I think it's tomorrow afternoon.
I encourage you to look at your agenda.
And this afternoon-- this-- tonight,
actually at 7:30,
we'll have what we call the Birds of
Feather for International Technologies,
and we'll have as well there
engineers from the Font Manager team,
from the AdSui team, from MLT.
If you have any questions on
techniques or maybe some blocking bugs,
we could probably look at it and,
you know, kind of talk between engineers.
A great session for those of you
that want to go international that
are wondering about the markets
that Apple is trying to address
with Mac OS X is session 010,
going international with Mac OS X,
which is going to be on
Friday at 10:30 in room A2.
Documentation.
We'll have Benny on stage, actually,
which is our tech representative.
He can talk about that.
And we'll have a new
font manager reference,
which explains the
what's the ATS framework,
and all these APIs we have
been discussing today.
You have the URL here at the bottom
of the screen for information.
More documentation on technologies
we discuss in this session,
Techno 2024, which is the Mac OS X font
manager reference,
which is kind of a
QA about what are D fonts,
a lot of things about what's new actually
on Mac OS X and the font manager,
which answers a lot of the
questions we've been getting
on the development list.
And as well, you could check the
Apple Type Services technical
documentation if you need to find more
about what we've been talking today.
You have here the URL.
The easiest thing for this kind of
documentation is definitely to go on
the TechPubs website where you have a
list of all the documentation available.
Should you have any questions
and contacts next week or
in two months or next year,
you can always send me an email at
xavier@apple.com and we'll make sure
we get whatever feature that you
would like or enhancement request,
get the priority bump and make
sure that we address your concerns.
I'd like to mention as well
at the bottom of the screen,
you have a Uberall URL, I suppose,
where you'll have all the URLs we've
been discussing today and this
morning in the previous session.